[Music]
hey welcome folks I'm going to be um uh
appreciative of your time and we'll get
started right away so hopefully we'll
finish on time as well um I'm Nathan
Jones it's an honor and a pleasure to be
here my only hope is that youall pick up
one thing that's kind of cool from this
talk that'll be time well spent so I got
this up here because uh I got
presentation materials at that link if
you uh care to follow it and kind of
samp little repo down there that that
we're going to go
through um okay so uh the talks called
uh make your own MCU boards and and the
story for this goes back a couple years
when I in grad school uh the summer
after my uh my first two semesters I sat
down to to to make a little project and
realized that um I really only had the
skills to do that on the development
board that we used in in our classes in
the IDE that you know we were using and
and I didn't really I didn't really know
how to how to start from scratch right I
had kind of had my hand held up to the
point where someone said this all plugs
together and works and I've done done
that for you and um and and now we're
going to program it um but uh but I was
looking at development boards you know
like the ones we used in class and I'm
sure you've you've programmed a bunch
this is a a random one from the little
swap pile over
there right this is a little TI board um
and and I said well you know there's an
engineer that put this on this PCB right
uh this board well I don't know what
this one costs but if I was going to go
buy a an um a new Cleo board or an
Arduino and I and I didn't wasn't going
to buy it from a source that was
disreputable I might still be paying
anywhere from10 to $25 for that
development board right and I and I can
go on a Digi key I can search for
microcontrollers I know they cost as
little as 50 cents or a dollar a couple
of bucks I said okay there's got to be
how do I do that how do I put a
microcontroller on a printed circuit
board and uh and get it to Blink an LED
or something so uh I I I did my best to
pick up some skills I I managed I feel
like to successfully do that a couple of
times you can see one example right
there of me playing around with the
stm32 and uh I'm going to share with you
just some of the some of the tips I
learned the takeaway I hope is that you
realize it's not if you've never done it
before it's not as hard as it seems like
it would be at first pass there's a lot
maybe that looks like it's going on here
but to just get a microcontroller on a
PCB or on a breadboard is not difficult
okay um so so that's kind of our goal
right we're going to we're going to hope
to take a microcontrol that we that we
want to play around with and put it on a
printed circuit board so we can we can
throw it in a project or maybe put it on
a breadboard and uh if we can keep it
small and and cheap then all the better
so the the first uh the first thing I
want to make sure everyone knows is that
on these development boards that most of
us are used to working with in in almost
every single case uh part of the reason
why they're kind of complex part of the
reason why they're they're not so cheap
is that in addition to there being a
microcontroller on that breadboard
there's also something called a buug
adapter and this is the device that
allows us to plug in a USB cable and
talk directly to the microcontroller to
not just load program onto it but also
to kind of Step through uh debugging if
we're using like the STM 32 Cube IDE or
something like that okay so um we're
going to we're going to focus on really
just putting the microcontroller on the
breadboard um every manufacturer sells a
standalone debug adapter that we can
plug to that into that board okay so um
step one uh is
let's draw the circuit maybe Step Zero
is uh figure out which microcontroller
you want to play around
with so I showed you on this this board
right here I've got a stm32
f302 okay so if we pick
uh let's say this one right here that's
stm32 F32 k6 I want to play around with
this one all right um let me go to the
oh here we go here's our documentation
all right yeah so um I'm G I'm going to
look for two things I'm going to look
for the data
sheet and I'm also going to look
for something called a hardware
development guide
all
right here we go there's a documentation
tab um St here we go getting started
with this stm32 F3 series Hardware
development
guide um St provides these separately a
lot of Manufacturers provide them
separately some of the manufacturers
will sort of just have a section in
their data sheets
uh that talks about Hardware development
um but in any case there is there's
something from the manufacturer
somewhere that says hey if you're an
engineer who's trying to build a
development board you're trying to put
our microcontroller in your product
these are the things you need to know
about the basic circuit that goes into
that device um and I'll let's see if I
can show you an example down
here all right here's a little reference
design for that
stm32 f 302 um
yeah and I'm not sure if I'm going be
able to rotate but hopefully um we can
kind of see this is the whole schematic
right and and the pin outs here are like
to a debug adapter there's like only a
handful of components we need and the
manufacturer saying this is all we got
to do to make sure that we can load code
onto this device and um and get it to
run it so uh as you dig through this
Hardware development guide as you look
at the data sheet you'll realize that
there are really only about three things
that we need to make sure we provide to
this microcontroller in order to get it
to work one's power okay one's a clock
source that doesn't necessarily need to
be external and one is some kind of
connection to that debug adapter to that
programmer um Believe It or Not uh just
about every microcontoller I've seen
requires almost zero external components
to to just load code and run it um even
the
stm32 uh really all you need is a
regulated power supply and you can load
code and and and and run code on that
device um so a lot of the stuff the the
stuff kind of purple is kind of nice to
have but it's not even really required
for power like I said we just need a
regulated supply of some sort the data
sheet will tell us what voltage range we
need most of the or some of the
complications in the development boards
and and even in the one that I kind of
put together uh just come from providing
options you want a couple different ways
to power the device potentially you
might want to use power to come out of
the development board to to send power
to the rest of your project so making
sure those power supplies don't back
feed each other is kind of the biggest
complicating Factor here you can see one
kind of example here of kind of the
simple way that I might plug multiple
things together that don't back power
each other and that's just to insert a
little shot key diod in between that
power source and the regulator so the D
will make sure that if if I got a
battery connected and my USB cable they
don't send power into each other the
shot key is preferred but it's not
required it's just because it has a very
low voltage drop once I'm drawing
current over it um so that will go into
some type of regulator that uh that I
send to the input pin on my
microcontroller um and like I said if
I've got a 3.3 Volt or a 5V power source
already available to me I don't even I
don't need the regulator right that's
just a that's nice to have a lot of
microcontrollers will have an analog
input pin or maybe like a battery backup
input pin so you can see here a couple
examples how you might set that up um it
depends a little bit on which
microcontroller you're using but the
hardware development guide will give you
recommendations on how to how to connect
those together right so that's all we
need to to provide power to the device
um the micro controller needs a clock
Source but that doesn't necessarily need
to be an external clock Source right
every microcontroller just about has an
internal clock um which depending on on
which manufacturer it is can be accurate
to a couple of percent which is
perfectly fine for most applications
including uh you know uart and I squ C
and and SPI um and in some
microcontrollers you can actually kind
of trim that down there's there's a
register or two that'll allow you to
sort of uh for a single microcontroller
um fine-tune that that internal
oscillator um it's really only if you're
going to do like USB um or maybe like
really high speed U like in the mega bod
range where where you want a more
accurate clock Source uh if you're going
to do that my best recommendation is to
find uh what I think is is called an
oscillator um not a crystal oscillator
just an oscillator and this is a
component which you provide Power and
ground to you and it emits a wonderful
little square wave that's super accurate
um you can send that typically into one
of the one of the clock input pins on
the microcontroller and that can be used
as a as your clock Source either high
speed or low speed um you'll see a lot
of designs that
use an actual Crystal or a
resonator and uh at the at the risk of
belying my ignorance I'm I'm going to
recommend I'm going to discourage using
that and the reason is just because to
get that circuit design right there's
actually a lot of physics and heavy math
that goes into making sure that that
circuit's been designed correctly um i'
I've built them before they're kind of
there there's a bit of a margin of error
but the problem is that unless you've
done the math unless you've really like
characterized that circuit then um
you've got no idea uh whether your
crystal is taking a long time to start
up or whether it's being overdriven and
the results can be not as accurate a
clock source as you think you're getting
or early degradation of that Crystal um
so uh you'll see these in designs but if
you want something that's robust unless
you're willing to go through all the
calculations I I'd recommend paying a
little bit extra to go with the the
oscillator
um and then we need some sort of
connection to our programmer which which
really is uh just some lines coming out
to a pin header if you've got um the
programming pins that you're also trying
to use as some form of gpio in your
circuit then the development guide might
tell you to connect some some resistors
before they go to your your uh where
what devices you're using them to drive
them so that the programmer the
programmer doesn't compete with with
those um you have the option of adding a
reset button uh a little pull-up
resistor but it's not required on the
STM 32s a lot of them actually have
internal pull-up resistors on the reset
so you don't even really need that for
the device to
operate and and with that little setup
we can start connecting to our our
programmer and and loading and running
code all right um
the uh the data sheets and the hardware
development guides will also talk about
any sort of manufacturing specific
things like what boot pins need to be
connect to connected to or how how
should we take care of unused pins if we
we're striving for a low power design um
so so that Hardware development guide is
definitely your uh your your friendly
reference um and then you know aot of
boards like to have some sort of power
LED right or a built-in LED just you can
kind of do a proof of Life once it's
connected this is an example of um
something I actually showed just at the
last Workshop of for pick
microcontroller how to wire it up uh for
that so you can see I really I really
just have the One external component
here a little pull-up resistor on my my
reset pin and other than that I'm
connecting it to a regulated power
supply I've got a little built-in LED
that I'm going use to Blink and that's
all I need to to load power or load code
onto this device and and start running
it all right so once I've got my circuit
together um I need to choose how I'm
going to build this thing and that'll
drive what parts I look at what my
layout's going to start to look like so
I can I can breadboard microcontrollers
I can even RedBoard really fast cortex M
devices like the
stm32 um I can use protoboards uh to to
make a little little uh project or I can
actually make my custom PCB all right
don't forget your debug adapter you got
a couple examples up here of the stlink
uh version two and version three that
are used to program the um STM devices
and MP laab snap to program the the P
devices remember we're not putting that
on our circuit so you got to buy that
separate um
if you're if you're building on a
breadboard or on a a Proto board then
you're kind of restricted to anything
through whole um and uh but that also
includes any breakout boards um you can
see a couple examples down here of
breakout boards from adaf fruit that you
can get for so soic chips and tsop chips
and
qfn um there are uh there's a link right
there from a company that provides
breakout boards for uh surface for SM
components in just about every footprint
and
that
that if we go to the uh if you go to the
presentation materials in here is a a
little Google Docs with a list of links
here um to some product pages and some
stuff about clock design and uh you got
a couple of the links down here for
other manufacturers that provide
breakout boards for all kinds of surface
mount components so even though we we're
using a board or a Proto board we're
we're not strictly restricted to just
things that are through hole if there's
a really critical component that we can
only find in a surface mount we can
potentially find just a breakout board
for it um and and that's that's my maybe
how you would uh take uh a
microcontroller that doesn't come in a a
bread boardable footprint which almost
none of them come in that footprint
anymore and actually still put that on a
breadboard or or prototype important uh
additionally if you're using a Proto
board you could you know get a little
creative and and potentially for larger
size service Mount components just
solder those directly to uh the little
pads on the on the circuit board if you
are um laying out your own circuit board
uh and you're going to do the assembly
yourself of course there's no
restrictions on what parts uh you put in
your design just whatever you can
assemble uh but I'm I'm a fan of uh jlc
PCB assembly for just kind of small
hobby stuff uh Alvaro gave a great
presentation a couple hours ago about
how he used that for one of his projects
and um I'll talk a little bit more about
using using that service at the end uh
if you're going to go that route then
you're just kind of limited to whatever
parts are available in uh in jlc's Parts
Library which at this point is still
close to 4 million um of all kinds
through holand surface Mountain uh a
bunch of different things
um I've got some examples down here of
uh USB breakup boards that you can
include in your design even if you're
bread boarding stuff um and for for
power options DC jacks or or using the
USB for for power here's an example of a
bread boardable oscillator so this is a
I believe it's an 8 MHz oscillator that
you can still find in a in a through
hole format uh and if you're if you're
looking for common parts this was a kind
of a helpful Wiki I think it's I don't
know if it's been updated in forever but
it was it was a great spot for me to
like if I'm just looking for a a
connector or a switch or a button to to
go there there's links to digi key and
Mouser and I think jamco on a bunch of
commonly needed parts for hobby projects
and that typically would at least send
me to the right part of the g website so
I knew which sort of you know where I
needed to look to find the part that I
needed all right and then um once we've
uh sort of picked our parts we know how
we're going to or how we're going to
attemp to construct this uh this MCU
board uh we got a couple different
options for circuit
layout uh following so the columns from
above right if I'm if I'm breadboarding
stuff um then uh I kind of I'm kind of
restricted to just some pen and paper
but you can find worksheets online that
will uh like that one that'll kind of or
make it a little easier to kind of plan
out your circuit if you are building
something in um uh a Proto board uh you
can do that you can also use a software
like fritzing to kind of help you Orient
and plan parts and the nice part about
that is I can make sure to enter my
schematic and if the schematic is
correct then when I go to this little
layout perspective in fritzing it'll
help me make sure that I'm not shorting
something and I haven't missed any
connections
um I could potentially also although you
might need to play around with it use uh
an actual CAD program if I just enforce
the grid to be uh you know tenth of an
inch spacing uh then I essentially Force
enforce that through hole layout in my
CAD program and uh and if I arrange my
components the way I wanted I can even
potentially let the auto router uh
connect everything up and then I just
have to make a sort of mental
translation depending on whether I'm
using a strip board or or a simple Proto
board how to take the traces that are on
that um through hole form format and
transfer it to my uh my strip board I'm
not going to go into uh uh actually how
to do that layout that's a talk for
definitely a different day I'm not going
to squeeze into a half hour how to use
eagle or key cat or whatever um but I
will say um one note on our layout here
we might be concerned about a couple of
things which include um high frequency
stuff so I'll give you a couple rules of
thumb right um in terms of uh High
frequency if I'm using a breadboard it's
it's somewhere in the low mehz range um
I I've breadboarded with up to like four
or 5 mehz I think without any ill
effects but definitely if you're over 10
MHz right that's going to be difficult
to breadboard with um and if you're
doing your own layout um it starts to
get complicated real fast here's your
two rules rules of thumb from a an app
Note by Sierra circuits which is also
linked in that reference of slide if
you're over 50 MHz you're definitely in
the highspeed realm if you're laying out
your circuit uh the other way to look at
it is to kind of compare what's my Max
fre frequency and how does that compare
to how how long a trace I'm I'm running
um the the actual definition for a
high-speed circuit kind of depends on
the rise time of a signal and also how
long I'm how long a wire I'm trying to
send that signal down so it's possible
even to like accidentally run into a um
a high-speed circuit at a very low
frequency if I have a very fast rise
time or a really long cable connector uh
but if I if I roughly take this equation
here 6.9 divid 012 times the length
where length is that length of that
Trace I'm running on my PCB that's got a
rough rule of thumb for when I'm in that
high-speed
realm all want to give you a couple more
notes if I'm if I'm laying something out
on on a printed circuit board that will
hopefully help you out um one is that uh
I definitely uh at this point I should
be thinking about who I want to
manufacture my printed circuit board and
uh and I should be looking at that
manufacturer's capabilities to make sure
that whatever I lay out is they can
actually build for me uh jlc PCB has uh
a an eagle rules file that I can use to
help make sure my designs within spec
Alo was a fan of kead he had a link
earlier in his presentation to um a
similar tool for for that piece of
software um it's not perfect I
definitely have like had designs that
pass the rules check that tlcb
themselves kick back and said hey we
can't we can't produce this but it's at
least the starting point um I can uh I
can put lots of options into my my MCU
board you know which power supply I want
to use and whether I want to include an
oscillator or not uh by potentially
throwing in a couple of two pin headers
that I can sort of drop a you know a
header pin and and a jumper on or I can
um you know close that with the trace if
I want that to be on the board by
default and just sort of cut that with a
hobby knife or Dremel if I want to
remove it I can do the same thing with
just like the pads of an 0805 random
component um and if it's uh if I'm if
I'm assembling it at jlc PCB I can even
sort of choose at assembly time whether
or not I want to put like a zero Ohm
resistor across that pad to kind of
optionally include or exclude something
in my circuit um and uh and I can find
of course test pad signals um to to
include all my designs um I'm not I'm
not super great about this but the rule
of thumb I've heard is you know one test
pad per per net if you can uh is is good
that way it's easy to scope and probe if
there's any problems um and then I I
I've got a link up here to a neat
project called debug Edge this is a um a
project that tries to use edgo Edge PCB
connectors to make that connections to
that programmer um that debug adapter
that we're going to use to program our
microcontroller uh you can see on my
board here I'm using that in the upper
right hand corner but I also left a
footprint for uh an actual kind of on if
I want to drop in like a 10 pin
connector to uh to try to program my my
stm32 and uh and that's that's pretty
honking that's pretty honking footprint
right there uh and and those parts are
the headers are at least 50 cents or so
which doesn't sound like a lot but if
I'm trying to make this board for for
three bucks 50 cents is you know gosh
that's 16% or so of my my total budget
so if I can cut that out then that
that's helpful to me uh so the neat
thing about the debug Edge is that it's
it's a lot smaller I can put it all the
way close to the edge it doesn't take up
as much space and there's there's zero
connector I have to buy one connector
for The Other Board to to to make that
mating but but that's it so there's some
some niceties there
um okay additionally uh here's some
rules of thumb for what's that kind of
the max current Max voltage I can push
through this PCB most of us will
probably not mess around with this at
all but it's helpful at least to know
what the upper limits are um the uh for
a 10 mil trace on the outside of my PCV
about three and a half amps is what I
can push through push through that Trace
um and as long as my my closest traces
are not closer than 24 Ms which is the
distance would be the distance between
like two header pins two pads at uh a
tenth of an inch spacing then I can have
at least I can have 100 volts DC roughly
before they start to Arc uh so as long
as we're well within that we don't have
to worry about it but there's links in
the resource document if you want to see
how those are calculated if you're ever
kind of getting close you want to make
sure your Design's not going to spark or
melt or something like
that um and then when we actually go to
construct this uh this microcontroller
board uh I and kind of got the three
columns so if I'm bread boarding it all
I got to worry about is soldering stuff
to my bread my my breakout boards and um
wiring it up um if I'm using a Proto
board I'll use those as well but I might
also use my Dremel to um either kind of
cut through a trace on my stripboard or
drill out a pad to to kind of break a
connection between two traces um I might
use the hot plater the toaster oven
super Advanced uh techniques to do some
easy surface mount soldering um if you
are are like me not still not super
comfortable with a really fine tip pen
soldering iron
um and uh and you can also use some
assembly Services uh some of these get
really expensive really fast but these
are the two that I found um which were
the cheapest and and for just kind of I
think low volume or hobby production
work uh perfectly suitable uh jlc will
produce for you um a board I think
they'll only do one side but they will
do surface mount or through hole
uh and you can see the equation kind of
here it's there's a kind of a base rate
of $95 to start the assembly process uh
they'll charge you uh what's that 0.17
cents for each of your surface mount
pads that are being soldered right so if
I've got a resistor that's that's two
pads uh they'll charge you uh 1.7 cents
plus a flat $3 half fee if You' got any
through hole
components um and then they'll charge
you an extra $3 if you're using any
extended Parts in their Library their
library is separated into basic and
extended basic are parts that are just
sort of live on their giant pick and
place machine there's no extra cost
using them um but if you pull out some
extended Parts uh that's a real they
sort of have to put on and off the pick
in place so there's a there's a nominal
extra fee for that um on this board here
I
think I think the reset the button there
the push button that I'm using as a
reset button and uh and my little you
can see a little surface mount
oscillator here that's uh q1 next to the
microcontroller I think those were like
the only extended Parts uh so so this
board um depending a little bit on how
much you populate uh you can get for
three to five bucks in quantities of 10
from from jlcpcb so that was kind of my
experiment and uh and I think it worked
well maker Fabs is another one that I'll
do uh the assembly for you at a
relatively decent cost uh their rate is
effectively $28 base rate plus 3 cents
pert pad or 4 cents per each uh through
whole pad excuse me
um and let's see somewhere in my my box
up here I've got some some samples uh
that I've done so you're welcome to come
take a look at at them afterwards
um the uh repository also kind of walks
you through uh this this board here um
and uh shows you the yeah I put I wanted
it to be very self-sufficient right so I
put a ton of information on the on the
sil screen on the back for some that
just kind of randomly maybe found this
at the Swap or something like that uh
that tells you hey what's the max
voltage that you can put in this thing
apply to vdd what's the max current that
you can pull out of the gpio based on
the um uh the MCU one of the cool one of
the things I thought was kind of cool
about this board was uh I actually
designed it to to hold the um stm32 f103
which is the the microcontroller that
sits on the blue pill um of course that
wasn't available uh year or so ago when
I finally put this together and went to
go order it so I started looking okay
what what other microcontrollers might
be have the same footprint um Giga
device is one one company that seems to
be a bit of a knockoff of SD they had a
bunch of microcontrollers that seem to
fit St themselves it seems like has done
a good job of trying to kind of match
Footprints as best they can so uh let's
see I think I found a uh about 125
microcontrollers that all in various
forms fit this this footprint here so
that that was kind of one thing that was
that was cool about about this project
and then I've got further down in here
um you know what how to order it um what
how much it might cost in different
configurations if you have the
oscillator if you don't have the
oscillator if you include a power
regulator if you don't um and uh I talk
a little bit about the the schematic for
for that board here this is this is that
schematic um and you can see that uh you
know I got my racker controller over
here going to a bunch of header pins um
here's my here's my little power circuit
right it was uh like like I said the
biggest reason that there's so much
stuff there is just because I wanted a
lot of options I figur figured I might
want to provide power from the debug
adapter I might have a battery attached
I might want to provide Power out to
some other part of my circuit so that
ends up being the most complicated piece
uh the s32 has a couple of uh boot pins
that control whether or not you're
booting into like the the direct
firmware update or into user code or
into somewhere else so there's some pins
there um and I have my little
oscillators but that's about
it um so if you poke around the
repository you can kind of see that
explained here and what um what can get
attached to which pin and and how you
can use the thing um
so uh so hopefully hopefully you picked
up something near the hardware
development guide right is your friend
and it's not as hard as it seems you can
start as simple as this right Adafruit
has qfn breakouts and and Q um uh qfp
breakouts so you can find
microcontrollers that are in those those
footprints that are in the s or the
t-stop footprint bake them with in a
toaster oven and throw it on a
breadboard and and start building those
circuits hopefully that repository and
that reference sheet provide a lot of
useful information uh but that's that's
all I have I'll take any questions now
and thanks for your
attention there was one over here that I
skipped over a question
ohud
oh you know great question I don't know
if I've got any specific feedback about
this silk screen definitely in the
process of putting the board together
before I I sent it out for assembly I
refined that multiple times to to try to
find a way to Crunch the information
down but still make it readable um
yeah
thanks anything
else um okay well I'll uh if you want to
care stick around for a minute I I'll
set out those sample boards up here if
you want to take a look at them
otherwise enjoy their the conference
folks thanks for
[Music]
everything